Is there something you can say about fundamental principles of judo?
Is there overall that time? Not 20,
over 20 years that you've been doing judo. Uh, it's not approaching 30 isn't.
Yeah. It's yeah. Getting it's going to get in there.
There were a couple of years away. Let's get in there.
Um, is there some like principles that have emerged, like you said,
you had to have your center of gravity below theirs.
Is there other kind of both on the gripping side,
the footwork side leverage and anything you can speak to?
There's some that have withstood like time,
like you have to be able to get below their center of gravity because you
have to be able to rotate them around their center of gravity.
And then the other one is that was always a principle when I was growing up and
I didn't change until later on in my career was you have to be able to pull,
you need to be able to pull, to get them off balance.
But when you think about that statement as a whole, it ended with,
they have to be off balance. I don't need the pull to get you off balance.
I just need you off balance. And when you think about it, that way,
it allows you to open up the doors to what do I need to do to get you off
balance? I could push, pull. I could flinch. I could fake.
And you could put yourself in your own off-balance state, right?
When you think about people who wrestle, right? If I fake shooed,
it causes you to over lean forward, which means you're off balance.
There's no pole, there's no push. There's no nothing.
I just get a reaction that leaves the opportunity and the door open for an
attack.
And that off-balance could be very.
Subtle. It could be very subtle.
And the better you get in the more skilled you get, the less subtle it is.
So we should also mention that there is something called forward throws where
you throw the person, you know,
they they're gonna fly facing forward.
They're gonna fly forward and then backward throw they're going to fly back.
Yep.
And then there's lateral, you know, they actually go sideways over it,
like a Cartwheel almost.
Okay. So the forward throws,
there is the one we've been talking about was just saying, again,
there's a bunch of different variants,
[inaudible] this drop and they're standing versions of them. And that all,
I don't know if there's a way to summarize it,
but that's like as clean as a,
getting your center of gravity under theirs as it gets.
And then the rest is just gripping variations. Yep.
I guess it's all gripping variations on all of these threads, but, um, and then,
uh, there is, uh, in terms of forward throws,
there's the other big one in competition is each
Yamada, which is, I dunno, we can try to explain that,
but it, uh, ends up being where one you're standing on,
just one of your feet and the other one is up in the air.
And I don't know if you'll put in that same category, her, I go,
she like those kinds of throws where you're kind of a little bit single
footed. And then, so there's.
Two footed techniques and then there's single.
Foot. Yeah. Oh, Goshi where it's like,
you're doing a mix between Uchi Mata and the Sandaga. Yep.
It's a hug.
You hug a person and then you turn your hips around such that you're now
hugging, facing the same direction.
I'm still forward. Throw theirs,
regardless of the name of the throw or the gripping variation that
you're using.
The whole principle is how do I get this person to do a forward roll in midair
and land on their back?
The more of a forward roll I can get the bigger, the score.
If I get like a quarter of a turn where like you land on your side and you don't
go over your back to half score. Yeah.
But they all require me to get you to do that forward. Rolling back.
Sure. So just, if we think of one person,
if they do this nice leap forward and they do a roll and their back
nicely rolls over the ground, you try and do the exact same thing.
Would you connect to them before?
And if it's nice and it's smooth, it's probably not a full score.
It needs to have like somewhat of a violent impact.
Right. So if you think of a drop, say Nagi, if I,
if I'm moving too slow and you still roll over your shoulders and there's no
direct impact, it's only a half score. Right. They want the force.
The force, the violence. Yeah. Good. Okay. Uh, so then, uh,
in terms of, uh, backward throws the traditional ones,
there's stuff where you trip them from outside their
body, like a Soto gari,
it's a trip where you hook your leg onto their leg and it tripped them.
But to your hook, it goes outside of their legs.
And then there's the trips from inside their body. There's a,
one foot is called guardian and the others, OCI gari doesn't matter.
The most important thing is outside and inside. Uh,
and then there's like,
I don't even know how you throw them sideways except foot sweeps.
And then there's the foot sweeps where you can sweep one of their legs from out
of them or both of their legs at the same time.
And like we were talking about this kind of is when timed perfectly,
it's, it's effortless for everybody involved. And, uh, the ending,
like you said, is big dramatic and violent. Yeah.
Is there other kind of, oh yeah, there's a sacrifice techniques. Yep. Um,
there's a bunch of them and that ultimately the variations have to do with, uh,
gripping,
but you're basically you the attack or fall onto your back sticking
legs somewhere on, onto their body,
which is like this fall Chrome over which day fly and do that same kind of role.
Yeah.
You basically sacrifice your back to the mat in order to throw them into that
circular pattern. So they hit their back. Sometimes we use a foot,
sometimes we don't.
And so we should probably say,
it's okay for you to go onto your back as long as you're clearly
demonstrating control over the other person's body.
Correct.
You can't go to your back in the same direction that you opponent is
trying to put you to your back. Right.
You have to go the other way or you have to initiate you going to your own
back.
All right. Uh, like clearly, and then, um,
and then there's all the counters,
which almost kind of have a whole group of their own, even though they have,
uh, echoes of the same types of techniques.
It seems like they're their own whole thing.
Yeah. But they follow the same principles. It's just most counters.
Like if you want it to counter energy Mata, for example,
your trying to throw me in a summer salt over my right shoulder,
therefore I would counter you by throwing you over your left shoulder.
It goes in the opposite shoulder direction, but in the same somersault.
The idea, and there used to be, I already forget at this point,
forget the years,
but it might be 20 before the 2012 Olympics or they banned, uh,
you used to be allowed to grab legs in the same way you do in wrestling.
So you have basically all the techniques you would have in wrestling, um,
available to you if you'd like. Yeah. Uh,
it's just that some of the techniques in wrestling are not that effective for
getting your opponent, your, to their back. Yep.
Wrestlers want to take the other person down in any way possible and then have
control. Judo wants to take you down. And like we said,
in a big fashion where your back slams on the ground. Yeah.
It has to be to the back.
A lot of wrestling takedowns happen because they get behind them. Yeah.
And then they, they parterre out. Yeah.
So, uh, but the judo banned all touching of the legs,
which is very dramatic change at the sport.
But on the 2012 after.
It was after.
In 2012, so 2008,
I fought the games and everything was free in 2012.
We could only touch the legs as a defensive action or
in response to an attack.
So I could try to throw you with a normal throw.
And then when you try to counter, I could grab you like.
Right. So th there.
Uh, had to be a secondary technique and didn't it.
Didn't they disqualify on a first offense.
That's first offense was a direct disqualification,
which happened at the 2012 games to the 57 Brazilian who
won in 16. Yeah. She was dqued and I think the quarters,
and it was like, I wouldn't say it was blatant as much as,
I don't think the act changed the outcome of the match. Had they not.
Disqualified? Sure. That's not that dramatic. And by the way,
you say 57 that refers to weight divisions in that in kilograms
and kilograms is the measure of weight that the rest of the world uses does not.
Um, so, and there's a, we should say the divisions for, for guys.
Um, I dunno what the 70, I don't know, the lower level.
60, 66,
73 and 81 9000 and heavyweight, which has no ceiling.
No ceiling. Yeah. It is important distinction.
Um, so,
and you competed most of your career at 81 kilograms. All of it.
All you never did.
Never did 73.
But you had to cut big for 81 anyway, especially.
Towards the end of my career. Yeah.
Okay. Uh.
I overly grew into the division. What's.
Uh, I'm trying to remember, is that about 180 pounds.
178.6, I think.
And you have to weigh in with the.
The geek. No, nothing.
You're not allowed to wear anything except for your underwear way is.
Sorry. Confused and digest. So that's right. That's right. That's right.
That's which is very nice. Um, okay. So we,
would you say we covered most of the throws or no.
So there's the forward and the backward,
there's a sacrifice throws in the counters. Yep. And the,
and then there's the light grabs.
And it was just say for the leg grabs that were effective, it's like, um,
the big pickups where you just kind of pick them up and try to figure out once
they're in there, what the heck to do with their body to get them.
To the ground. You just kind of figure it out as you go. I.
Think the really nice one that was, to me,
heartbreaking as a fantasy go is, I guess what's called a Fireman's carry,
which is, um, you know, it does lead to judo,
like beautiful throws.
And the fact that that was gone as is that one I missed a little bit,
but then a bunch of people, I guess,
came up with the variance where you don't need to grab the leg.
Uh, it's definitely not as effective as being able to grab it,
but I'm also on the side of the fence, having competed in all three,
it was definitely better for the sport to remove it as a whole.
It's probably good to cover sort of the whole spectrum of rules of,
of judo is a there's groundwork. So there's a,
you do all this stuff on the feet where you're trying to murder each other with
the giant throw, but then, you know, if the throat doesn't succeed,
you go to the ground and you stay in the ground for some amount of time,
like short amount of time, you have to move quickly, you have to be attacking.
And, uh, w w two of the ways you can win is similar to people who do jiu-jitsu,
as you can submit them, uh, chokes on breaks, all that kind of stuff,
no foot locks. And, uh,
and you can also pin yep. It was just get around their legs. And this is very,
no, this is not like wrestling. You have to actually get around their legs and,
uh, pin them in what ingest is called side control,
Mount all kinds of ways that doesn't involve their likes. Yeah.
And then you pin them for like, whatever, 20 seconds.
It's 25 seconds, 20 seconds.
Now I think the distinction is their back has to be facing the mat.
You have to be past their legs and your chest has to be on the same plane as
theirs. Yeah. So it doesn't have to necessarily be on top,
but it has to be on the same plane.
Yeah.
And all of this is I think different sports have different versions of this,
but it's like an approximation of what dominance looks like. Yeah.
So Penn and wrestling is dominating your opponent.
Presumably if you were in a street fight,
that position allows you to then do a lot of damage.
Obviously submissions is dominance because you're breaking their arm or choking
them to a, uh, unconscious. And then obviously the throw,
which is not often talked about, but like,
if you talk about a street fight situation,
a throw is like the best way to murder somebody like
this could end anyone's life. Yes. It's terrifying actually. So, okay.
So these are elements of dominance.
So going back to set of principles,
you were mentioning getting your center of mass under there's,
which I think applies for type of, um, like the forward say nugget throws.
Is there, is there other stuff, um, also you mentioned off balance.
There's the,
off-balance one where you can either pull to get an off balance or you can give
way to the force, which can also lead to an off-balance.
Um, you can amplify somebody force to,
so for example, if you push me,
you expect a certain reaction that you're ready for,
but if you push me and I pull you now,
you didn't expect that much force coming out of you,
therefore you're off balance.
The thing that's distinctly recognizable about judo is like when done
at the highest level, like it's,
it seems effortless when the big throw happens. Yeah. Like that's just,
it doesn't, there is no other sport, like it in the,
in the combat sports where it's like, when the timing is right,
everything's just this perfect. I think you, you get that in my ma and, um,
boxing sometimes when this is a knockout. Yeah. Perfect strike.
Just like where they, but it's not just like a hard hit it's like,
it's almost like the, with Conor McGregor and Aldo, for example,
when you just catch him just rush. Right.
And that he didn't look like he hit him that hard, but he hit him just right.
Yeah. And like, you get to see this all the time in Judah is as fascinating.